>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY FEBRUARY 7: WORLD
LEADERS TRY TO DEFUSE THE
CONFLICT IN UKRAINE-- WE'LL HEAR
FROM A REPORTER ON THE SCENE; IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
MAIN STREET, COLUMBUS,
MISSISSIPPI-- NEW JOBS AND NEW
ECONOMIC HOPE.
>> MODERN MANUFACTURING,
ESPECIALLY IN THE GOLDEN
TRIANGLE OF MISSISSIPPI,
DEFINITELY, AS YOU HAVE SEEN, IS
NOT DISAPPEARING.
>> Stewart: AND WHAT A SEARCH
FOR GERMS ON THE NEW YORK CITY
SUBWAY SYSTEM MIGHT MEAN FOR
SCIENTISTS TRACKING DISEASE
OUTBREAKS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
HARI SREENIVASAN IS OFF.
AT A SECURITY CONFERENCE TODAY
IN MUNICH, GERMANY, WORLD
LEADERS TRIED TO FIND A WAY TO
END OR AT LEAST CONTAIN THE NOW-
ESCALATING TEN-MONTH CONFLICT IN
EASTERN UKRAINE.
THIS AS THE UNITED STATES AND
NATO CONSIDER WHETHER TO SEND
ARMS TO THE PRO-WESTERN
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT TO HELP IT
THWART AN OFFENSIVE BY PRO-
RUSSIAN REBELS.
IT'S AN IDEA THAT ONE OF
AMERICA'S MOST RELIABLE ALLIES,
GERMANY, HAS RESISTED.
>> (translated): I THINK THE
PROGRESS THAT UKRAINE NEEDS
CANNOT BE ACHIEVED BY MORE
WEAPONS.
I REALLY DOUBT THAT.
I REALLY DOUBT IT.
I CAN'T STRESS IT ENOUGH.
>> Stewart: AND RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEI LAVROV WARNED
THE WEST AGAINST SENDING MORE
ARMS.
>> (translated): THERE ARE
GROWING APPEALS IN THE WEST TO
SUPPORT KIEV'S POLICY OF
MILITARIZATION, TO PUMP UKRAINE
FULL OF LETHAL WEAPONS AND TO
BRING IT INTO NATO.
THIS WILL ONLY EXACERBATE THE
TRAGEDY OF UKRAINE.
>> Stewart: BUT VICE PRESIDENT
JOE BIDEN RESPONDED THIS WAY:
>> WE WILL CONTINUE TO PROVIDE
UKRAINE WITH SECURITY
ASSISTANCE, NOT TO ENCOURAGE WAR
BUT TO ALLOW UKRAINE TO DEFEND
ITSELF.
LET ME BE CLEAR: WE DO NOT
BELIEVE THERE IS A MILITARY
SOLUTION IN UKRAINE.
BUT LET ME BE EQUALLY CLEAR: WE
DO NOT BELIEVE RUSSIA HAS THE
RIGHT TO DO WHAT THEY'RE DOING.
>> Stewart: TODAY, AT THAT
SECURITY CONFERENCE IN MUNICH,
UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO DISPLAYED DOCUMENTS
WHICH HE SAID PROVED RUSSIA'S
DEEP INVOLVEMENT IN THE
FIGHTING.
POROSHENKO MET IN KIEV THURSDAY
WITH MERKEL AND FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE.
THEN THEY TRAVELED TO MOSCOW FOR
MEETINGS WITH RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN.
A CEASE FIRE WAS STRUCK IN MINSK
LAST SEPTEMBER BUT WAS VIOLATED
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY, AND HAS BEEN
VIOLATED REPEATEDLY SINCE.
WE'LL HAVE MORE FROM UKRAINE IN
A MOMENT.
THERE WERE A SERIES OF SUICIDE
BOMBINGS IN BAGHDAD TODAY.
AT LEAST 37 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND DOZENS MORE INJURED AFTER
BOMBERS TARGETED SHOPPING AREAS.
THE IRAQI CAPITAL HAD BEEN
RELATIVELY CALM IN RECENT
MONTHS, AND A LONGSTANDING
NIGHTTIME CURFEW IS ABOUT TO BE
LIFTED.
NORTH KOREA TODAY TEST-FIRED
WHAT IT DESCRIBED AS AN
EXTREMELY PRECISE, CUTTING EDGE
ANTI-SHIP ROCKET THAT IT SAID
WOULD BE DEPLOYED SOON.
STATE MEDIA SHOWED IMAGES OF
NORTH KOREAN LEADER KIM JONG UN
OBSERVING THE NEW WEAPON BEING
FIRED.
THE MILITARY DISPLAY COMES WEEKS
BEFORE THE UNITED STATES AND
SOUTH KOREA ARE SCHEDULED TO
BEGIN JOINT MILITARY EXERCISES.
IN THE LATEST SIGN OF STRAINED
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND ISRAEL, VICE
PRESIDENT BIDEN'S OFFICE NOW
SAYS HE WILL BE TRAVELING WHEN
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU ADDRESSES CONGRESS
NEXT MONTH.
NETANYAHU'S APPEARANCE WAS
ARRANGED WITHOUT CONSULTING THE
WHITE HOUSE, SOMETHING CRITICS
SAY IS A BREACH OF DIPLOMATIC
PROTOCOL.
AS VICE PRESIDENT, BIDEN
OFFICIALLY PRESIDES OVER THE
SENATE.
THE U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HAS
ANNOUNCED THE INDICTMENT OF SIX
PEOPLE ON CHARGES THEY SENT
MONEY AND MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO
TERROR ORGANIZATIONS, INCLUDING
AL QAEDA AND ISIS.
THE SIX-- BOSNIAN NATIVES LIVING
IN MISSOURI, ILLINOIS AND NEW
YORK-- ALLEGEDLY SENT TACTICAL
GEAR, FIREARM ACCESSORIES AND
U.S. MILITARY UNIFORMS TO
FOREIGN FIGHTERS WITHIN THE
TERROR GROUPS.
THE BOSNIANS REPORTEDLY USED
INTERMEDIARIES IN TURKEY AND
SAUDI ARABIA, WHO THEN FORWARDED
THE SHIPMENTS.
FIVE OF THEM HAVE BEEN ARRESTED,
THE SIXTH IS OVERSEAS.
MAJOR PROGRESS IN THE
GOVERNMENT'S EFFORTS TO COMBAT
DRUNK DRIVING.
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC
SAFETY ADMINISTRATION SAYS THE
NUMBER OF PEOPLE DRIVING WITH
BLOOD ALCOHOL LEVELS EXCEEDING
THE LEGAL LIMIT, .08, HAS
DECLINED BY 30% SINCE 2007 AND
80% SINCE THE FIRST SURVEY IN
1973.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE SAME
SURVEY FOUND THAT DRIVING UNDER
THE INFLUENCE OF MARIJUANA AND
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS CONTINUES TO
RISE.
>> Stewart: AS WE REPORTED
EARLIER, WORLD LEADERS HAVE BEEN
MEETING TO TRY TO END THE
FIGHTING IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
FOR MORE ON THE SITUATION IN
UKRAINE, WE ARE JOINED NOW VIA
SKYPE FROM DONETSK BY PETER
LEONARD, WHO IS REPORTING THERE
FOR THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
PETER, ONE OF THE MORE STRIKING
EVENTS THAT'S HAPPENED RECENTLY
IS IN THE SMALL DOWN OF-- AND
I'M GOING TO TRY TO SAY THIS
CORRECTLY-- DEBALTSEVE, IS THAT
THE FIGHTING CEASED FOR A SHORT
PERIOD OF TIME SO THAT CIVILIANS
COULD EVACUATE.
BOTH SIDES STOPPED FIGHTING.
FIRST OF ALL, WHAT'S THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS TOWN, AND
WHY STOP THE FIGHTING?
>> WELL, TO BEGIN WITH, THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TOWN IS
ESSENTIALLY THAT IT LIES ALONG A
RAILWAY LINE THAT CONNECTS THE
TWO MAIN REBEL CITIES.
AND SO, IF THESE REBEL
TERRITORIES ARE EVER TO BE
ECONOMICALLY SUSTAINABLE AND TO
EXIST AS INDEPENDENT ENTITIES AS
THEY WOULD LIKE, THEY REALLY
HAVE TO HAVE ALL OF THE
TRAPPINGS OF AN ACTUAL
FUNCTIONAL STATE, WHICH IS TO
SAY, A TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE AND VARIOUS OTHER
KINDS OF INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.
AND SO, THIS IS WHY THE REBEL
OFFENSIVE HAS CONCENTRATED SO
MUCH ON CAPTURING THIS CITY.
NOW, IN WHAT CAME AS KIND OF A
CLEARLY UNUSUAL DEVELOPMENT, THE
UKRAINIAN AND THE REBEL SIDE
AGREED TO SUSPEND HOSTILITIES
FOR A FEW HOURS YESTERDAY SO
THAT THE CIVILIANS WHO HAVE
REMAINED IN THE CITY COULD BE
EVACUATED.
THE TOWN HAS BEEN ON THE
RECEIVING END OF SUSTAINED
SHELLING FOR SEVERAL MONTHS NOW,
BUT ESPECIALLY INTENSIVE
SHELLING FOR THE LAST COUPLE OF
WEEKS.
>> Stewart: THE HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS IS GROWING; ABOUT A
MILLION PEOPLE ARE DISPLACED AT
THIS POINT.
IS THERE ANYTHING BEING DONE ON
THE GROUND TO ADDRESS THIS
CRISIS?
>> IN FACT, THE NUMBER OF
DISPLACED PEOPLE IS ACTUALLY A
HIGHER THAN JUST A MILLION.
IT'S NOW ABOUT A MILLION WITHIN
UKRAINE ITSELF AND ANOTHER
600,000, ACCORDING TO U.N.
FIGURES, WHO'VE LEFT THE
COUNTRY, MOSTLY TO RUSSIA.
AND AS I SAY, THE EFFORTS ARE
MAINLY CONCENTRATED ON
RESETTLING THOSE PEOPLE WHO'VE
SOUGHT SHELTER IN SAFER AREAS,
ALTHOUGH, AS FAR AS UKRAINE IS
CONCERNED, WITH THE DISASTROUS
STATE OF ITS ECONOMY, IT'S
REALLY SORT OF STRAINING TO
SUPPORT THIS HUGE DISPLACEMENT
OF PEOPLE.
RUSSIA, CLEARLY, HAS GREATER
RESOURCES IN THAT RESPECT.
>> Stewart: AND WHAT IS THE
SITUATION IN DONETSK, WHERE YOU
ARE?
>> REALLY, IT SORT OF VARIES
FROM DAY TO DAY.
AND EVEN AS I'M TALKING TO YOU,
FROM TIME TO TIME, I HEAR SOUNDS
OF OUTGOING SHELLING.
SO, IT'S... THE FIGHTING IS
STILL VERY CLOSE TO THE CITY
INDEED.
>> Stewart: ANGELA MERKEL,
GERMANY'S CHANCELLOR, HAS SAID
SHE DOES NOT BELIEVE THIS WILL
END ON MILITARY LINES, WHEREAS
THE UNITED STATES IS CONSIDERING
SENDING WEAPONS TO THE UKRANIAN
SUPPORTERS.
WHY THE DIFFERENCE IN OPINION
BETWEEN THE U.S. AND EUROPE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I MEAN, THE
THING IS, I SUPPOSE EUROPE FEELS
LIKE IT HAS A RATHER GREATER
STAKE IN THE WHOLE SITUATION.
I MEAN, UKRAINE IS RIGHT ON ITS
DOORSTEP.
AND I THINK THAT IT FEELS AS
THOUGH EUROPEAN LEADERS WOULD
RATHER THIS WHOLE PROBLEM WENT
AWAY.
I MEAN, WITH GREECE ON ITS
PLATE, I THINK PROBABLY BERLIN
FEELS LIKE IT HAS MORE THAN
ENOUGH TO COPE WITH.
THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN VERY
SUPPORTIVE OF THE GOVERNMENT
THAT CAME IN AFTER THE
REVOLUTION LAST YEAR, AND I
THINK IT FEELS AS THOUGH THE
POSSIBILITY, THE KIND OF THE
DANGLING OF POTENTIAL MILITARY
SUPPORT IN THE MONTH TO COME
IS... I SUPPOSE WASHINGTON
CONSIDERS TO BE A CONTINUATION
OF ITS SUPPORT FOR THIS VERY
STRONGLY PRO-WESTERN GOVERNMENT.
>> Stewart: PETER LEONARD,
REPORTING FOR THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, THANK YOU SO MUCH AND
PLEASE BE SAFE.
>> WILL DO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE CONTINUE OUR "MAIN
STREET" SERIES-- STORIES ABOUT
NATIONAL TRENDS TOLD FROM A
LOCAL PERSPECTIVE, FROM MAIN
STREET U.S.A.
IN THIS INSTALLMENT, WE FOCUS ON
THE RETURN OF MANUFACTURING JOBS
TO AMERICA.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN LARSON TRAVELED TO
COLUMBUS, MISSISSIPPI, WHERE A
RECENT MANUFACTURING BOOM IS
BRINGING JOBS TO A ONCE-
STRUGGLING COMMUNITY AND PUTTING
A SHINY NEW FACE ON MAIN STREET.
>> Reporter: JUST A LOOK AT MAIN
STREET IN COLUMBUS, MISSISSIPPI,
AND YOU CAN SENSE WHY TRAVEL AND
LEISURE VOTED IT ONE OF
"AMERICA'S GREAT MAIN STREETS."
BUT IT HASN'T ALWAYS BEEN THIS
WAY.
AS THESE IMAGES TAKEN OVER THE
YEARS BY COLUMBUS' OWN WORLD-
RENOWNED PHOTOGRAPHER BIRNEY
IMES SUGGEST, MISSISSIPPI HAS
ENDURED CHALLENGES THROUGHOUT
ITS HISTORY.
UNEMPLOYMENT, STILL 15% IN SOME
PARTS, INCLUDING SOME OF THE
POOREST PEOPLE IN THE POOREST
STATE IN THE NATION.
AN UNLIKELY PLACE, YOU'D THINK,
FOR AN ECONOMIC RECOVERY.
AND YET, AT 516 MAIN STREET,
THAT'S PRECISELY THE STORY.
THE "COLUMBUS COMMERCIAL
DISPATCH" IS THE LAST FAMILY-
OWNED DAILY NEWSPAPER IN
MISSISSIPPI.
THE HEADLINE ON THIS AFTERNOON?
A JAPANESE TIRE COMPANY WILL BE
OPENING A NEW PLANT WEST OF
TOWN.
YOKOHAMA TIRE WILL EMPLOY 500
PEOPLE AND POSSIBLY UP TO 2,000
IF ALL GOES ACCORDING TO PLAN.
MISSISSIPPI GOVERNOR PHIL
BRYANT:
>> THESE ARE MANUFACTURING JOBS.
AND THEN, SO, HOPEFULLY, THEY
ARE THOSE TYPE THAT WILL BE
TRANSFERRED FROM ONE GENERATION
TO THE NEXT.
>> Reporter: THE TIRE PLANT IS
JUST THE LATEST IN WHAT IS NOW
CALLED "THE GOLDEN TRIANGLE," A
SHINING EXAMPLE OF NEW
MANUFACTURING IN AN AREA THAT
NOT TOO LONG AGO WAS JUST THE
OPPOSITE.
PLANT AFTER MANUFACTURING PLANT
HAD CLOSED HERE IN THE LATE
'90s.
>> THE DAY BEFORE THE BIG
SHUTDOWN...
>> Reporter: AND THEN, IN 2007,
THE AREA'S LARGEST EMPLOYER FOR
DECADES, SARA LEE, CLOSED ITS
FOOD PROCESSING PLANT.
YET, THE AREA'S REBIRTH WAS
ALREADY UNDER WAY.
SEVERSTAL, A RUSSIAN STEEL
MAKER, BUILT ITS $900 MILLION
PLANT HERE, FOLLOWED BY PACCAR,
THE AMERICAN BUILDER OF TRUCK
ENGINES.
AND WHEN AIRBUS DECIDED TO BUILD
HELICOPTERS HERE, MANY FELT IT
LAUNCHED A NEW ERA.
>> I JOKINGLY TELL PEOPLE THAT
ALL OF A SUDDEN PEOPLE STARTED
WALKING UPRIGHT.
THEY STARTED THINKING, "HEY, YOU
KNOW, WE BUILD STUFF THAT
FLIES."
>> Reporter: AT 1102 MAIN
STREET, JOE MAX HIGGINS RUNS
LINK, THE DEVELOPMENT GROUP
CREDITED WITH ATTRACTING MORE
THAN $5 BILLION IN NEW
INVESTMENT TO THE TRIANGLE.
HIGGINS IS THE AREA'S LARGER-
THAN-LIFE SALESMAN, AND YOU CAN
GET A SENSE HOW THAT HAPPENED.
>> LIVE EVERY SECOND LIKE YOUR
ASS IS ON FIRE.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS, GO
FOR IT.
>> ALL THE TIME.
AND... AND... AND... AND SO
THAT... THAT... THAT'S... THAT'S
TYPICALLY HOW WE LOOK AT THIS
STUFF.
MY LICENSE PLATE ON MY... ON
MY... MY VEHICLE SAYS "2EQLAST."
>> Reporter: SO "SECOND EQUALS
LAST."
>> OH, EVERY TIME.
IN THIS BUSINESS, IF YOU COME IN
SECOND, YOU MIGHT AS WELL NOT
HAVE PARTICIPATED.
WE'RE VERY, VERY, VERY LUCKY...
>> Reporter: TO COME IN FIRST
WITH YOKOHAMA, HIGGIN'S GROUP
HELPED COORDINATE A STATE EFFORT
OFFERING $130 MILLION IN
INCENTIVES.
IT BOUGHT THE LAND, DEVELOPED
THE SITE AND BUILT A NEW ACCESS
ROAD.
WHEN YOKOHAMA RAISED CONCERNS
ABOUT THE RELIABILITY OF THE
LOCAL WORKFORCE, JOE HIGGINS
MADE AN EMOTIONAL PLEA TO ITS
TOP OFFICER.
>> I SAID, "THIS IS A COMMUNITY
WHO... THAT'S HEART WAS CUT OUT
WHEN SARA LEE LEFT."
I SAID, "YOU COULD BE THE
PHOENIX RISING UP FROM THE ASH
BY BUILDING THIS NEW FACILITY
HERE, AND YOU COULD REPLACE SARA
LEE AS THE COMMUNITY'S HOPE."
AND HE LOOKED AT ME AND HE SAID,
"I WANT TO SEE THIS SARA LEE."
>> Reporter: SO, HIGGINS TOOK
YOKOHAMA'S CHAIRMAN UP IN A
HELICOPTER.
>> WE DID TWO AND A HALF TIMES
AROUND THE... AROUND SARA LEE.
I LET HIM LOOK OUT THE WINDOW.
>> Reporter: YOU'RE LOOKING DOWN
AT DESTROYED PLANTS.
>> LOOKS LIKE A BOMB HIT IT,
OKAY?
AND TWO AND A HALF TIMES, HE
LOOKED UP AT ME AND HE NODDED.
I KIND OF THINK BACK THAT THAT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN THE DAY... THAT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN THE DAY, THE
SECOND THAT WE WERE PICKED.
>> Reporter: YOKOHAMA AND OTHER
MANUFACTURERS WERE ALSO DRAWN TO
THE AREA'S INDUSTRIAL MEGA-
SITES, PRE-APPROVED AND READY
FOR CONSTRUCTION; AS WELL AS
NON-UNION LABOR AND
UNIVERSITIES, INCLUDING THE
LOCAL COMMUNITY COLLEGE.
THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE HAS A
TRACK RECORD OF TRAINING ITS
STUDENTS FOR HIGH-TECH FACTORY
WORK.
FOR TRAINING PURPOSES, AIRBUS
PROVIDES STUDENTS WITH
HELICOPTER COMPONENTS.
PACCAR OFFERS TRUCK ENGINES.
EAST MISSISSIPPI COMMUNITY
COLLEGE'S DR. RAJ SHAUNAK.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THE LINE THAT
WE'VE ALL HEARD FOR DECADES NOW,
THAT AMERICAN MANUFACTURING IS
EITHER DEAD OR IT'S DYING?
>> MODERN MANUFACTURING IN
AMERICA, BUT ESPECIALLY IN THE
GOLDEN TRIANGLE OF MISSISSIPPI,
IS NOT DISAPPEARING.
>> Reporter: SO, HOW MUCH DOES
THE AREA GETS OUT FOR ALL THE
INCENTIVES IT GIVES TO INDUSTRY?
IN THE STEEL MILL'S CASE, LOCAL
EFFORTS PROVIDED $12 MILLION IN
LAND, INFRASTRUCTURE AND TAX
BREAKS.
THE COUNTY NOW RECEIVES MORE
THAN $2 MILLION A YEAR IN
REVENUES, WHICH WILL SOON GROW
TO $5 MILLION EVERY YEAR.
SO, THE INVESTMENT WILL MORE
THAN PAY OFF IN THE LONG RUN.
>> ♪ WE SHALL OVERCOME...
>> Reporter: THE AREA'S REBIRTH,
HOWEVER, IS ONLY ONE OF THE
STORIES WE ENCOUNTERED ON MAIN
STREET.
WE WERE IN TOWN THE WEEK OF DR.
MARTIN LUTHER KING DAY.
>> IF REVEREND DR. MARTIN LUTHER
KING WAS HERE TODAY, WHAT WOULD
DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING DO?
>> Reporter: THE GATHERING TOOK
PLACE ON THE COURTHOUSE STEPS
WITHIN A FEW FEET OF A CIVIL WAR
MONUMENT HONORING THOSE WHO
DEFENDED THE VALUES OF THE
CONFEDERACY.
>> MISSISSIPPI IS STILL A VERY
SEGREGATED SOCIETY.
A LOT OF PEOPLE LIKE TO PUT
BLINDERS ON AND ACT LIKE IT DOES
NOT EXIST.
>> Reporter: KAMAL KARRIEM IS A
LOCAL PREACHER WHO HELPED
ORGANIZE THE EVENT.
>> IN MISSISSIPPI, THERE IS A
PSYCHOSIS OF POVERTY.
IN OTHER WORDS, I'VE BEEN POOR
FOR SO LONG, UNTIL I THINK THAT
THAT'S THE WAY THAT IT'S
SUPPOSED TO BE.
>> Reporter: THE COUNTIES AROUND
COLUMBUS INCLUDE SOME OF THE
POOREST PEOPLE IN THE POOREST
STATE IN THE NATION.
IN SOME AREAS, ONE-THIRD OF THE
PEOPLE LIVE IN POVERTY.
THE COLUMBUS PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM HAS BEEN LARGELY
ABANDONED BY ITS WHITE
RESIDENTS.
40% OF THE CITY IS WHITE, YET
ONLY 10% OF THE CITY'S SCHOOL
SYSTEM IS WHITE.
MISSISSIPPI PUBLIC SCHOOLS ARE
POORLY FUNDED AND THE WORST
PERFORMING SCHOOLS IN THE
NATION.
>> THIS SCHOOL DISTRICT
TRADITIONALLY HAS ALWAYS HAD A
FAILING GRADE, A "D."
THIS IS WHAT WE HAVE TO
OVERCOME, NOT JUST IN EDUCATION
BUT IN EVERY ASPECT OF LIFE.
WE HAVE TO OVERCOME THE
PSYCHOSIS OF POVERTY.
>> Reporter: WHICH BEGS THE
QUESTION, TO WHAT EXTENT WILL
THE AREA'S POOR BENEFIT FROM THE
NEW MANUFACTURING?
MANUFACTURING TAXES SUPPLY MORE
THAN A QUARTER OF THE COUNTY'S
SCHOOL BUDGET, BUT THEY
CONTRIBUTE ONLY A FRACTION TO
THE CITY'S STRUGGLING SCHOOL
SYSTEM.
>> GOOD JOB, BUDDY.
GOOD JOB.
>> Reporter: CEDRIC BROWNLEE AND
HIS WIFE SHARIKA BOTH WORKED AT
SARA LEE UNTIL THE PLANT CLOSED.
>> ALL OF A SUDDEN, IT WAS GONE,
YOU KNOW?
IT WAS LIKE, WOW, YOU KNOW?
IT WAS DEVASTATING, YOU KNOW,
FOR THE... FOR THE COMMUNITY.
YOU KNOW, THERE WAS... THERE WAS
A LOT OF PEOPLE, YOU KNOW, WHO
REALLY DIDN'T KNOW, YOU KNOW,
WHAT TOMORROW WAS GOING TO
BRING.
>> Reporter: WHILE BOTH WORKED
MINIMUM WAGE JOBS, CEDRIC
ENROLLED AT EAST MISSISSIPPI
COMMUNITY COLLEGE.
HE WORKED HARD, EARNING SEVERAL
CERTIFICATIONS.
SEVEN YEARS AFTER LOSING HIS JOB
AT SARA LEE, HE WAS FINALLY
HIRED-- A FULL-TIME JOB WITH
BENEFITS AT PACCAR, THE TRUCK
ENGINE PLANT.
HE NOW EARNS $15 AN HOUR, DOUBLE
HIS MINIMUM WAGE JOBS.
>> YOU KNOW, WE CAME A LONG WAY,
YOU KNOW.
NOW, HERE WE ARE.
WE ARE LIVING BETTER THAN WE
EVER LIVED.
>> Reporter: SAME FOR GENICE
ALLEN, WHO DOUBLED HER PAY WHEN
SHE LANDED A JOB AS AN
ENGINEERING SPECIALIST AT
AIRBUS, AND THE COMPANY IS NOW
PAYING FOR HER TO PURSUE A
BUSINESS DEGREE.
>> IT HAPPENED FOR ME, SO I'M
VERY THANKFUL FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY.
>> ♪ I'M GONNA HIDE BEHIND...
>> Reporter: BEFORE WE FINISH
OUR STORY, MEET YUSEF KARRIEM,
KAMAL KARIM'S SON.
HE SANG THAT NIGHT AT THE
COURTHOUSE.
A HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR, YUSEF
WASHES DISHES AT HIS FAMILY'S
SOUL FOOD RESTAURANT.
LISTEN TO HIM SING FOR A
MOMENT...
>> ♪ I WAS BORN
BY THE RIVER... ♪
>> Reporter: ...AS WE SHOW YOU A
FEW MORE IMAGES FROM
PHOTOGRAPHER BIRNEY IMES.
>> ♪ I'VE BEEN RUNNING
EVER SINCE
♪ IT'S BEEN A LONG,
LONG TIME... ♪
>> Reporter: MOST EVERYONE WE
MET ON MAIN STREET HERE SAYS ANY
DISCUSSION OF THE TOWN'S FUTURE
MUST REMEMBER ITS PAST.
>> ♪ IT'S BEEN TOO HARD FOR
LIVING... ♪
>> Reporter: BEFORE WE LEFT MAIN
STREET, WE LEARNED THAT FIVE OUT
OF THE FIRST 11 YOKOHAMA HIRES
ARE AFRICAN AMERICAN.
YOUNG YUSEF WILL NOT BE ONE OF
THEM BECAUSE HE PLANS TO ATTEND
COLLEGE TO BECOME A BIOLOGY
TEACHER, AND THEN A PUBLIC
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATOR.
>> ♪ BUT I KNOW
A CHANGE GONNA COME. ♪
>> IT WAS TOUGH, NOT KNOWING
WHEN CHANGE WAS GOING TO COME.
>> Reporter: AND AS FOR CEDRIC
BROWNLEE, WHO, AFTER YEARS OF
STRUGGLE WAS HIRED AT THE TRUCK
PLANT, THE MANUFACTURING BOOM
HAS ALREADY CHANGED HIS LIFE.
HE AND HIS WIFE HAVE BOUGHT
THEIR FIRST HOUSE AND LAST YEAR
TOOK THEIR FIRST VACATION.
YOU MEAN, LITERALLY, YOUR FIRST
VACATION?
>> OUR FIRST VACATION.
>> Reporter: SINCE WHEN?
>> SINCE FOREVER.
YOU KNOW, IT... IT WAS OUR FIRST
VACATION.
>> Reporter: HOW'D THAT FEEL?
>> AND IT... IT FEELS WONDERFUL.
>> Stewart: SEE MORE OF THE
IMAGES OF LIFE IN THE
MISSISSIPPI DELTA BY
PHOTOGRAPHER BIRNEY IMES.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: YOU MIGHT HAVE SEEN
THE HEADLINES THE PAST DAY OR
TWO ABOUT HOW SCIENTISTS IN NEW
YORK SEARCHED THE CITY'S SUBWAY
SYSTEM AND, PERHAPS NOT
SURPRISINGLY, FOUND ALL KINDS OF
GERMS THAT COULD CAUSE
EVERYTHING FROM THE COMMON COLD
TO MENINGITIS.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS
IMMEDIATELY DOWNPLAYED ANY
SERIOUS THREAT, AND WISE-
CRACKING NEW YORKERS JOKED ABOUT
THE STORY, BUT THE WORK IS
ACTUALLY PART OF A VERY SERIOUS
EFFORT TO BOLSTER THE PUBLIC
HEALTH SYSTEM.
JOINING US NOW IS THE SCIENTIST
WHOSE WORK GENERATED THOSE
HEADLINES.
DR. CHRISTOPHER MASON IS A
GENETICIST AT WEILL CORNELL
MEDICAL COLLEGE.
DOCTOR, WHAT DID YOU DO EXACTLY
IN THE SUBWAY?
>> SO, WE WANTED TO BUILD THE
FIRST MOLECULAR MAP OF NEW YORK
CITY, KIND OF LIKE A GOOGLE
MAPS, WHERE YOU CAN ZOOM IN AND
SEE WHAT MOLECULES ARE PRESENT
AT DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE CITY
TO BETTER CLASSIFY, TRACK AND
UNDERSTAND HOW THE DYNAMICS OF
THE SURFACES THAT WE ALL TOUCH
EVERY DAY, HOW THEY CHANGE OVER
TIME.
BUT TO DO THAT, WE FIRST NEEDED
TO BUILD A BASELINE.
>> Stewart: HOW DID YOU DO THAT?
YOU LITERALLY WENT INTO THE
SUBWAY AND START SWABBING?
>> WE DID, INDEED.
SO, WE HAD MIXTURES OF HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS, GRADUATE
STUDENTS, PUBLIC HEALTH
STUDENTS, MEDICAL STUDENTS DOWN
SWARMING THE SUBWAY SYSTEM AND
BRINGING NYLON SWABS AND
SWABBING FOR THREE MINUTES TO
COLLECT ENOUGH D.N.A. AND
BRINGING IT BACK UP TO THE
LAB.
WE EXTRACT D.N.A. AND THEN
SEQUENCE IT, ESSENTIALLY
GENERATING TEN BILLION SMALL
MOLECULES OF D.N.A. THAT'S ALL
AROUND THE SUBWAY SYSTEM.
>> Stewart: WHAT WAS THE THING
YOU FOUND THAT YOU THOUGHT, OH,
DIDN'T EXPECT THAT?
>> SO, THE MOST SURPRISING PART
OF THE STUDY WAS THAT ABOUT 48%
OF ALL THE D.N.A. MOLECULES WE
FIND DON'T MATCH ANY ORGANISM
THAT'S KNOWN TO HUMANKIND.
SO, THERE'S REALLY A WEALTH OF
DISCOVERY LITERALLY UNDER OUR
FINGERTIPS THAT WE'VE NEVER
SEEN BEFORE UNTIL THIS STUDY.
>> Stewart: WHAT IS THE
BROADER MISSION OF THIS STUDY?
>> SO, WE'RE TRYING TO... WITH
THIS BASELINE, WE'RE TRYING TO
THEN EXPAND OUT TO SEE HOW DOES
THIS CHANGE WITHIN ONE CITY OVER
TIME, SO YOU CAN LOOK AT SORT OF
SEASONAL SHIFTS OF WHAT HAPPENS
TO WHAT WE CALL THE MICROBIOME,
WHICH IS THE ECOSYSTEM OF
MICROORGANISMS THAT WE ALL TOUCH
EVERY DAY.
AND THEN, ALSO, IN A LARGER
SENSE, WE WANT TO BE SORT OF A
SMART CITY SO THAT WE COULD
USE THIS TO LOOK, ESSENTIALLY,
FOR CHANGES IN THIS BASELINE
THAT MIGHT INDICATE CHANGES FOR
DISEASE SURVEILLANCE OR
POTENTIALLY COULD CONTEXTUALIZE
A BIOTERRORISM EVENT IF IT WERE
TO OCCUR.
>> Stewart: IS THIS SOMETHING
THAT CAN BE APPLIED TO OTHER
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
SO, WE... PART OF THE CONTEXT IS
NOT ONLY WITHIN THE CITY OVER
TIME, BUT COMPARING NEW YORK TO
OTHER CITIES.
SO, WE WANT TO... WE
ESSENTIALLY, THERE IS SOME WORK
BEING DONE IN BOSTON.
WE'VE BEGUN SWABBING IN SAO
PAULO IN BRAZIL, ALSO BEEN
LOOKING IN PARIS AND TOKYO, AND
SOME WORK IS IN HONG KONG.
AND WE ALSO HAVE COLLABORATORS
IN SHANGHAI.
SO, THE LARGER GOAL IS TO REALLY
HAVE MOLECULAR VIEWS OF MANY
CITIES.
>> Stewart: AND, CURIOUS IF THIS
APPLIES IN ANY WAY TO ALL THE
DISCUSSIONS WE'VE BEEN HAVING
ABOUT... THAT PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
HAVING ABOUT MEASLES?
>> LOOKING AHEAD WHAT, WE COULD
DO WITH THESE TYPES OF STUDIES
AND THIS TYPE OF DATA IS TO MAKE
IT EVEN FASTER.
SO, THERE ARE TECHNOLOGIES-- AND
SOME OF THEM ARE IN MY
LABORATORY TODAY-- WHERE YOU CAN
ACTUALLY SEQUENCE D.N.A. AS IT
APPEARS IN REAL TIME.
SO, IN THAT CASE, YOU WOULD THEN
KNOW NOT AFTER SOMEONE GOT SICK,
ESSENTIALLY, BUT YOU'D KNOW AS
THE PIECE OF D.N.A. OR R.N.A.,
OR AS THE VIRUS OR BACTERIA
APPEARS IN A CITY, YOU COULD
POTENTIALLY TRACK IT IN REAL
TIME AND THEN RESPOND TO IT MUCH
FASTER.
SO, IT COULD POTENTIALLY IMPACT
ALL OF THE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN THE CITIES AND
BILLIONS OF PEOPLE WHO RIDE THE
SUBWAY OR TRANSIT... MASS
TRANSIT EVERY YEAR.
>> Stewart: DR. CHRISTOPHER
MASON, THANKS FOR SHARING YOUR
SCIENCE.
>> THANKS, PLEASURE BEING HERE.
>> Stewart: WE SHOOK HANDS, BY
THE WAY.
>> AND FIST BUMPS, YES.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: AND NOW TO "VIEWERS
LIKE YOU," YOUR CHANCE TO
COMMENT ON SOME OF OUR RECENT
WORK.
MANY OF YOU WROTE US ABOUT OUR
INTERVIEW DESCRIBING A RECENT
PEW POLL, A POLL THAT FOUND A
LARGE GAP BETWEEN WHAT
SCIENTISTS BELIEVE AND WHAT THE
PUBLIC BELIEVES.
ON THE ISSUE OF GENETICALLY
MODIFIED FOODS, THE READER
COMMENTED: "SCIENTISTS ARE SO
BUSY CREATING 'BIGGER AND
BETTER,' THEY FAIL TO CONSIDER
THE PENALTIES OF THEIR
CREATIONS.
AFTER WATER, FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES ARE THE STAFF OF
LIFE, AND LIFE SHOULD, AT THE
VERY LEAST, BE REAL."
GARY GUTHRIE SAID: "WHAT'S SCARY
IS THAT 12% OF SCIENTISTS
APPARENTLY BELIEVE THAT G.M.O.s
ARE NOT SAFE TO EAT.
THAT IS THE GROUP TO LOOK TO FOR
FACTS."
AND FROM YAANG: "THE GENERAL
PUBLIC MAY DISTRUST SCIENCE ON
QUESTIONS OF WHAT CONSTITUTES A
HEALTHY DIET BECAUSE THEY WERE
LED ASTRAY SO MANY TIMES.
THINK OF HOW SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT
HAS CHANGED ON DIETARY
CHOLESTEROL, GOOD/BAD FATS,
CARBS, EQUIVALENCE OF DIFFERENT
SUGARS, FOOD PYRAMIDS, ETC.,
ETC."
LINDA BAETZEL SZULCZEWSKI ADDED:
"I AGREE THAT G.M.O. IS PROBABLY
OKAY.
I DO THINK THAT WE HAVE A RIGHT
TO KNOW WHATISA G.M.O."
THERE WAS THIS FROM FREDRIC
DENNIS WILLIAMS: "IN THE END,
SURVEYS OF THE IGNORANCE OF THE
POPULATION ONLY SERVE TO SHOW:
ONE, PEOPLE LACK A DECENT
EDUCATION AND THE ABILITY TO
DISCERN FACT FROM FICTION;
TWO, GOVERNMENT MISLEADS PEOPLE,
USUALLY INTENTIONALLY AND FOR
ITS OWN PURPOSES; AND, THREE,
THE MEDIA LOOK FOR SENSATIONAL
STORIES THAT INSPIRE FEAR.
WELCOME TO DUMBOCRACY 2015."
MARY BETHUNE JORDAN SAID: "I
GUESS I'LL HAVE TO LOOK INTO
WHO IS BEHIND THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER.
I DON'T BUY THIS POLL."
AND FINALLY THIS, FROM ROLFE
ERIC TIKKALA: "I'M WITH SCIENCE
ON THIS, BUT, THEN AGAIN, I BET
ON THE SEAHAWKS."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Stewart: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
EMBATTLED NBC NEWS ANCHORMAN
BRIAN WILLIAMS SAID TODAY HE IS
GOING TO TAKE HIMSELF OFF THE
NIGHTLY NEWS FOR THE NEXT
SEVERAL DAYS.
WILLIAMS HAS BEEN ACCUSED OF
FABRICATING A STORY ABOUT COMING
UNDER FIRE WHILE COVERING THE
WAR IN IRAQ BACK IN 2003.
ADNAN SYED, WHO HAS BEEN
IMPRISONED FOR ABOUT 15 YEARS
AFTER BEING CONVICTED OF
MURDERING HIS GIRLFRIEND, HAS
BEEN GRANTED AN APPEAL.
THE APPEAL WILL BE HEARD IN
JUNE.
SYED'S STORY WAS THE SUBJECT OF
THE POPULAR PODCAST "SERIAL."
AND A PAINTING BY GAUGUIN HAS
SOLD FOR ALMOST $300 MILLION,
THE MOST EVER PAID FOR A PIECE
OF ART.
THE 1892 WORK REPORTEDLY WAS
SOLD BY A SWISS COLLECTOR TO A
GROUP OF MUSEUMS IN QATAR.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M ALISON STUART.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.